Add-ons to common 1/4" modular coolant tube (eg Loc-Line and knock-offs) to mount to optical table and add optics mounts and accessories.

Modular 1/4" coolant pipe is common and cheap (~$1 for a 12" section, with threaded end).  I purchased a dozen 1' sections for a bit more than $10 off of eBay from a Chinese supplier.  Tubes are nice that they can be repositioned easily and will hold position well.  A bit of modification and you have something that can be used to hold an optical component or other accessory in an arbitrary position.  Moving to a new position is a matter of grabbing the tube and putting it where you want.  

Tube is commonly supplied as a length of tubing section, each about 1" long, a nozzle on one end, and a threaded mount, often with a valve, on the other.  Nozzle is not needed, but the threaded section is.  Be sure that any part you buy has that portion.  A few different sizes are available, but the 1/4" size is the most common and the one used here.

Two parts are included.  First is a base with a 1/4" NPT thread and a) three mounting holes on a 25 mm grid or b) four spots for 10 mm x 3 mm magnets w/ recessed 3 mm hole.  The 25 mm grid holes line up with the holes on a metric optical table or the magnet version sticks to the top.  Other end is a 'cap' part that clamps to the top end of the tube section and also has a M4 nut embedded.  Any component can be added onto this cap assuming it mounts with an M4 thread (as the bulk of Thorlabs' and Newport's metric components do).  Doesn't have to be an optical component, obviously, but anything with an M4 thread will work.  We found some aligator clips that could be crimped onto a M4 stud, for example.  

The magneted version of the base works with 10 mm x 3 mm magnets with a recessed 3 mm hole.  A M3 flat head cap screw will fit in the magnet with a spot for a M3 nut on the other side.  4 of each are needed to finish off the parts.  This size N50 magnet is available on eBay for about $0.20 each.  Buy extra because not all of the ones you buy have the proper recess dimensions to fully recess a flat head cap screw below the edge of the magnet face. If the screw sticks out the magnet doesn't hold nearly as well.  Best plan seems to be to try what you buy out until you find 4 that work. 

Assembly of the cap piece requires the insertion of an M4 nut into the internal recess.  This is straightforward to do by heating the nut on the end of a soldering iron and applying gentle pressure.  A bit of clean-up to clear out the hole may be requried.  Then an M3 nut and screw on the external tab is added to allow the clamping pressure on the tube end to be increased.  The assembed cap will snap onto the end of the coolant tube (may take a bit of force).  If the cap is loose then tighten the M3 nut.  Once assembed the optical component can be added via the M4 nut on the cap. 


For those in the US, The base should fit fine on an Imperial table mounted with 1/4"-20 screws.  An 8-32 nut may be a tight squeeze into the space for the M4 nut (M4 is 7 mm across flats, while 8-32 is almost 9 mm).

The parts work well printed on a Zortrax M200 with Z-UltraT filament and 90 um layer height.  The support material on the threads on the base can be a bit of a pain to remove, so if you can print without support on your printer that'll save a good bit of time (10 degree support threshold on the Zortrax gets this).  The cap is best printed upside-down, with the side to become the top against the build plate.  Depending on the tolerances of your printer, you may need to do some finishing work on the cap to have a part that clamps well onto the tubing pieces without excessive force to move.